**
PAGE: Ipanema Beach in Rio
is the Mecca
for tanned, toned,
Speedo-wearing partiers,
and then there's us.
[ Rap music playing ]
I'm wearing shorts.
That's a big deal.
Look at these.
I think mine are whiter.
I don't know.
I think I'm whiter.
[ Rap music continues ]
We're arriving in Brazil
at the peak
of Carnival season,
one of the most sexually
liberated parties on the planet,
to explore a country
whose relationship
with the queer community
is complex and often extreme.
It's a country with some of the
most progressive equality laws
in Latin America,
but also has the highest LGBTQ
murder rate in the world.
So Ian and I are here
to explore what's going on,
and what it's really like
to be queer in Brazil.
**
* Did you see them?
* Oh, did you see them?
* They're just walking around,
yeah *
* Whoo!
**
Close to 1 million tourists
descend on Brazil
for its annual Carnival.
Got my swimming jeans on.
[ Laughs ]
We have, like,
fall clothes on.
[ Laughs ]
**
Very nice.
You look good.
Taking some pics.
Today is Fat Tuesday.
Carnival is happening.
And then tomorrow
is Ash Wednesday,
when it ends,
and then Lent begins,
which goes until Easter.
And this originally
was just
like a massive,
massive party to be had
so that everyone got
all their craziness
and their sinning out
of their system
before looking well
in the eyes of God.
I don't necessarily think
that's technically
the vibe anymore.
But that's why Carnival
is what it is,
and why everyone's here
getting their drink on.
-Living it up.
-On the beach.
Living the dream.
Hey, guys.
Do you mind if we talk to you
for a minute?
This is my friend Ellen.
-Hi.
We hear that Brazil
is very open-minded.
You can be
whatever you want to be.
And I also get that feeling
when I'm here.
But you read about it,
and you hear that Brazil
has one of the highest
murder rates
of LGBT people in the world.
So we're trying to figure out,
like, the reality of that.
Do you --
do you know about that?
Is that -- is that true?
Happy Carnival.
PAGE:
I can see what makes Rio one
of the most desirable LGBTQ
destinations in the world,
especially around Carnival time.
Carnival takes place
all over the vast city.
But the main event is held
at the Sambadrome,
a mile-long purpose-built
Carnival stadium
where tickets
are like gold dust.
It's costumes,
glitter and glamour.
Carnival attracts the LGBTQ
community in droves.
This year, a float
celebrating sexual identity
is one of the main attractions
in the parade.
You just have to get
into the building first.
Everybody should have one.
Go in through here?
I feel
slightly discombobulated
in the best possible of ways.
'Cause I think
it's gonna be crazy.
But there's all these,
like, costumes.
And then it's also, obviously,
like, hyper-sexual.
But there's also, like,
a familial vibe.
It's like, "How nice would it be
if we had something like this?"
Oh, yeah.
I like those, like, dolphin kind
of dildo-y-looking costumes.
Got to get me one of those
for the boudoir.
Up here? Okay.
Hi.
[ Drums beating, music playing ]
So, we're at the Sambadrome.
And it's like 100,000 people.
I feel like the awesome thing
about it is
it's not professional dancers.
It's just all
these different areas of Rio
and neighborhoods
coming together.
And practicing and rehearsing
for all year,
and it's pretty amazing
to watch.
It's pretty beautiful.
**
Shit, man.
We're walking through the area
where the samba schools
congregate to prepare
and get ready and wait to go out
down the main sort of strip
that we were just in
in the Sambadrome.
The parade is made up of samba
schools that each contribute
up to eight floats
and spend around nine months
preparing for the event.
Ooh.
Some of the most important
people of the night
are the choreographers,
who are responsible
for the hundreds of dancers
in the parade.
Hi, I'm Ellen.
Hi, I'm Fabio.
How are you, Ellen?
Good. So, thanks so much
for talking to us.
I'm sure this
is an insane night.
It's amazing.
It's like nothing
I've ever seen.
-It's your first time here?
-First time in Brazil.
It's my first day here.
Do you know dance?
I mean, I can -- poorly.
Yeah.
[ Both laugh ]
But I like it.
-Yeah?
-Yeah.
I will show you
the dancers. Come in here.
Hi.
Wow.
And you can try it
if you want.
Oh, man, I don't know.
Put it on my...
Yeah.
Cool!
Is it a good look?
That's what you do?
Yeah,
just keep doing this.
-Okay, yeah, all right.
-Yeah, good.
-Think I'm ready now?
-Yeah, very.
What is the influence
of gay, lesbian, trans culture
in Carnival?
Sure.
I was just wondering, like,
the LGBT community,
how it's influenced Carnival
and the celebration.
You know, there's
a very safe environment,
a very welcoming environment.
When it ends, do people
get to live safely?
I think everybody,
in especially Rio,
are accepting a lot
the gay people.
And we are going
to just not be
like a problem
or a question.
I think it's a fact,
we're born like that.
PAGE:
Despite his optimism,
the world outside the
celebration is somewhat harsher.
Just a few weeks
before we got here,
the dead body of 25-year-old
transwoman Piu de Silva,
one of Carnival's
most prominent dancers,
seen here in costume,
was found tortured and shot
in a favela near her home.
No arrests have been made
in the case,
and the exact motive is unclear,
but many suspect transphobia.
De Silva is just one
of the growing number
of transgender victims
in Brazil,
a country
with the greatest number
of murdered transpeople
in the world.
Carnival is
an over-the-top extravaganza
and feels very accepting
of everyone.
But in speaking to locals later,
the world outside can feel
very different.
[ Thunder rumbling ]
As the biggest party
on the planet winds down,
it's gonna be interesting to see
how Carnival compares
to daily life
for the queer community
here in Rio.
While in town, I'm meeting
my friend Ana Rezende
from the band CSS.
She was born and raised here,
so I'm interested to get
her take on being gay in Brazil.
REZENDE: My experience
doesn't necessarily reflect
the experience of, like,
the rest of Brazil.
Like, Brazil
is a huge country
and it's so hard to talk
about the average Brazilian,
because the average Brazilian
almost doesn't exist in a way.
I guess I'm part of, like,
a very privileged few.
In that wage disparity,
I'm, like, probably
more at the top.
Mm-hmm.
We're sort of, like,
protected by our privileges.
You were saying that, you know,
here you feel comfortable,
you feel safe, you feel
all those things,
but you don't hold
your girlfriend's hand
walking down
the street.
What is that experience
for you?
Like, what do you --
what happens
if you were to hold
your girlfriend's hand?
It's not normal for people
to see that,
so there's a lot of staring,
and there's a lot of, like,
it's as if you're, like,
naked on the streets,
and I just don't want to draw
that kind of attention to me.
People don't perceive it
as normal yet.
To be, like, just a normal woman
and happen to be lesbian,
it's like something
that I believe
a foreign concept
to some people.
Like, I can go out here
and hold hands with my
girlfriend and hang out,
and it's fine.
But I'm gonna draw a lot
of attention and energy
and stuff that maybe
I'm not in the mood
to do it, you know?
So that's why I don't do it,
which is super sad.
Like, what do you think
is gonna happen in Brazil
to help it move forward?
I'm very optimistic
about this stuff.
The extreme presence
of the evangelicals and politics
and this rise of, like,
the right wing
is actually a reflection
of the progress
that the gays
have been making.
We're actually here,
and we're actually fighting
for our rights.
We already
can get married.
Now we want homophobia
to be criminalized.
And they're like,
"Oh, I didn't know
you had to have rights."
Right.
[ Laughs ]
So, there's like
this whole...
Oh, you need those crazy
human-right things?
God damn it.
**
PAGE: Day breaks over Rio,
and the streets and beaches have
returned to a relative calm,
while the locals get back
to doing one of the things
they're best at --
looking hot on the beach --
DANIEL: There seem to be people
that are just free living.
They're not really worried about
how other people perceive them
or if their body
is chiseled or not.
And I think that, to me,
everyone is looking good.
In America, you don't see men
wearing Speedos as much.
Or, to be honest, letting
their...shine through.
There's no --
do you know what I mean?
You can definitely see a lot
of people's...here
through their bathing suit,
fine.
And the women definitely have
the "thong up the butt" vibe,
and there's no shame.
So let's all do it.
That's the vibe.
PAGE: Despite the heavy air
of sexual confidence,
conflicting opinions
on being gay remain.
I don't think people
are actually born gay.
I couldn't explain
why I think it.
I just think that people
aren't born gay.
It's an option.
I think it's a choice, yeah.
One man who is taking
a political stand
on the fight to achieve equality
and protection under the law
is Jean Wyllys,
a member of Brazil's
Federal Parliament
and the country's
only openly gay politician.
Congressman Jair Bolsonaro
is a major voice
in the anti-gay movement
in Brazil,
and a main figurehead
for a return to conservative
Christian values.
I'm interested why you feel
lesbians are more vulnerable.
It's shocking to hear
about the violence that lesbians
face in Brazil.
Buteskina is one of the most
popular lesbian bars in Rio.
If these women are nervous
about being open in public,
they're doing a good job
of hiding it.
[ Dance music playing ]
Strength is in numbers,
and sticking together
is a necessity
in the face of prejudice.
But speaking to one of my new
friends away from the party
confirms the harsh realities
that lesbians face here.
Pardon? Oh.
No.
Cheek, sure.
Thank you.
...
It's pretty hot out.
I've had a couple drinks
of tequila.
I tend to get shy.
If I think a girl is cute,
I'm shy.
You know,
I'm typically wonderful
at flirting with people
who I don't mean to flirt with,
and horrible at flirting with
people who I mean to flirt with.
Story of my life.
[ Dance music playing ]
What's happening?
PAGE: A couple of drinks
may have turned into a few more,
and before I know it, I'm at
the center of a samba circle,
and the less said
about the crew, the better.
[ Dance music playing ]
[ Cheers and applause ]
**
PAGE: In Brazil,
35% of the LGBTQ murders
are in the transgender
community,
and lack of acceptance
keeps them on the margins
of Brazilian society.
DANIEL: So, what is it like
out here every night?
How do you protect yourself
on the street?
MAN: Okay.
I'm on my way to meet Luana,
who is the queen of Lapa,
which is a famous
red-light district in Rio.
Luana has become sort of
the madam or the guru
to the transgender sex workers
in the area.
She herself has been a
prostitute since the age of 10.
Okay.
PAGE: Luana, along with her
friends, formed an organization
for transgender sex workers
as a way to legitimize
and protect them
in the eyes of the law.
Thanks so much.
DANIEL: So, Luana has just left
the premises
in a blaze of glory.
But she's left us here
in the house of Luana.
And we're gonna talk with some
of the women that live here.
And if you're wondering about
this beautiful kiss I have
on my face, the kissing
has already begun.
Hi.
This is your room?
Oh, thank you.
Can you describe to me what
kind of clients you have,
and what your clients are
looking for, specifically?
Welcome to Lapa.
Hello.
-Hi.
Hi.
Come in here, baby.
[ Laughs ]
You want me to carry?
Oh, thank you.
I don't think any man
wants to...
You're Jessica.
Okay, Jessica,
come in here, business.
All right, darling, fine.
I can do that.
Yes, no. Yes, I like.
Yes.
Okay, okay.
**
There's my girl.
PAGE: A two-hour flight south
of Rio brings us to Sao Paulo.
We're meeting a woman who
is redefining what it means
to be a transwoman in Brazil.
We're here to interview
Carol Marra,
who is a transwoman who broke
through as a model,
who's now shifting to acting,
did the first trans kiss
on Brazil television, ever.
Ellen. Nice to meet you.
-Ian. Nice to meet you.
-Nice to meet you.
PAGE: So, what's going on today?
You're doing a photo shoot?
DANIEL: Thanks so much
for letting us watch you today
at your photo shoot.
You seem really confident
and really, like, into it.
What was your life like growing
up, and where are you from?
Has your family
changed at all?
Like,
are they coming around?
So, then, how do you feel that
you've overcome those odds?
You know, I want to say that
your confidence does spread.
It's very infectious.
And I feel more confident
being around you.
It's like
an infectious thing.
It's a beautiful thing.
You interview people who are
filled with such strength
and beauty and hope and courage.
We're all born
into a homophobic society.
We just are.
We're in some places that are
better than others, no doubt.
But the moment
you are a conscious being,
every story you're told,
every movie you see,
almost every song you hear
is heterosexual,
and typically
also hetero-sexist.
And infused in you
is a feeling of shame.
And sometimes I think
you don't even know
how much that's affecting you
for a really, really long time.
Particularly after coming out,
it became so clear to me
how much that held me back.
I just wish people
could get over it.
There's gay people.
There's trans people.
Can we move on?
PAGE: Here we are
in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
which is an absolutely
gorgeous city.
Seems like just
a stunning urban paradise.
And we're here to explore
the LGBT culture
and what people here are facing.
At first glance,
Brazil is a welcoming place
for the gay traveler.
It's been on the forefront of
LGBTQ rights in South America,
being the first country
in the southern hemisphere
to allow gay people to marry
and adopt children.
It's also home
to the largest number
of Catholics in the world,
and in recent years has seen a
rise in conservative evangelism.
These religious conservatives
regard homosexuality
as an abomination,
and some even perform exorcisms
to rid the body
of homosexual tendencies.
[ Groaning ]
And now this religious extremism
is having an influence
on politics,
which is threatening
to repeal progressive laws
and undermine the rights
of the queer community.
[ Speaking Portuguese ]
PAGE: Jair Bolsonaro
is a right-wing congressman
and a major voice in
the anti-gay movement in Brazil.
And he's agreed to meet with me.
So it's gonna be
very interesting
to have an honest discussion
to understand
why he has such difficulty
with accepting LGBT people here.
I definitely feel, like,
a little nervous,
but I'm also interested
to just go meet a human being
and have a discussion
and attempt to understand.
Thank you so much
for meeting with us today.
I know you're a very,
very busy man,
and we really appreciate
your generosity of your time.
Thank you. Well,
thank you for doing that.
I believe you know why we're
here and what we're making.
Maybe you could describe
a little your
political background
and your current role
in government as a deputy.
I've personally read things
you've said,
and the things you've said,
to me, come across
as very homophobic.
And, you know, I mean, you can,
of course, you know,
defend that now
or explain it to me.
But I read a quote
that said
someone should beat the gay
out of their son.
And I'm wondering, I'm gay,
so do you think
that I should have been beaten
as a child,
to not be gay now?
Well, that's the issue
right there,
is you do not think
it's normal.
You say that you should beat
your gay child,
and you've said that you'd
rather your son be dead
than gay.
And you thinking
it's not normal,
it produces all this prejudice
and all this hate.
It turns into shame
in people.
And if they're getting
made fun of,
it turns into severe depression
and suicide.
Well, as a gay person,
if I can make you feel better
about this fear
you seem to have,
I don't want anyone to be gay
who's not gay.
I want gay people who are
suffering and in the closet
and suicidal to be okay
and to love who they are.
But I don't want people
who aren't gay to be gay.
Except maybe Kate Winslet.
[ Laughs ]
All jokes aside,
Bolsonaro is a politician
with a great deal
of power and influence.
And it's devastating to know
that someone
with so much influence
has such a disdain
for the queer community.
We've come to City Hall
to hear firsthand
the stories of families
who have lost loved ones
in violent homophobic attacks.
I'm meeting with Gilmaria
and Marco,
the mother and boyfriend of Tom,
who was tragically killed
a few months ago.
If you feel okay about it,
we'd love if you wanted
to maybe share with us
a little about your case, and
what you've been dealing with.
MARCO: Somebody calls me,
one of his --
one of his friends,
and tells me that
he's in the hospital,
victim of two stabs
in the neck.
And then my world crumbled
right there.
Do you think he was, you know,
targeted specifically
because he was gay?
And so, were the people
who did this,
were they people
that were people you knew,
who were sort of in your world
already, or were they strangers?
He's very beautiful.
[ Sniffles ]
I'm so, so sorry.
Thank you.
Should I wrap it?
Um...
Thank you so much, uh,
for coming
and being so open-hearted
and sharing your story.
Um, I cannot begin
to imagine the pain.
I'm so sorry.
**
PAGE: A large part
of Rio's landscape
is occupied by favelas.
And it's in places like this
where the highest percentage
of LGBTQ murders take place.
**
DANIEL: Wow.
I'm totally kind
of blown away by it.
We're in one of the largest
favelas in Rio.
Over 300,000 people
live in this area,
and you'll see
it's on a high hilltop.
So the government has installed
these hovering cable cars
for people to be able to get
from one area to the next.
So, every year there's
a gay-pride parade
that happens in this favela.
Last year, the organizer
of the parade was shot.
So we're here to kind of explore
what's going on this year,
if there are tensions
in the area,
what it's like to be gay and
to hang out here for Carnival.
What did he say?
Tell me what he's saying.
MAN: He said are you taking
the piss out of him?
No, no, no, not at all.
In fact, the opposite.
You can tell him
that I'm the same way.
Yes, come on, now.
No making fun of anybody.
Making fun of myself.
Come on, now.
[ Laughs ]
What is it like to be gay
and live in a favela in Brazil?
PAGE: As we've seen
throughout Carnival season,
there seems to be a practice
of cross-dressing,
particularly among the men.
But in talking to some of them,
we realized this was more
about a dress-up tradition
rather than a reflection
of tolerance or their identity.
So, you obviously don't normally
dress like this, or do you?
Wow!
[ Laughs ]
[ Drumming ]
I'm kind of dizzy.
How do I look?
PAGE: Today's spirit
of acceptance and abandon
is inspiring.
But these communities
are still vulnerable to danger.
We're nearing the end
of our time in Brazil,
and one final meeting looms.
A meeting which, if I'm honest,
I'm not even sure
I want to have.
**
Right now we're on our way
to go interview a gentleman
who we'll be interviewing
anonymously,
and happens to be a cop.
But he also happens
to be someone
who really hates homosexuals,
and has killed gay people,
um, and also sometimes works
as a contract killer.
We're gonna go talk to him
and try and gain an idea
of why he has such hatred
towards LGBT people.
We know that you're a cop
that you also did other work
on the side.
And we're wondering if,
maybe in your own words,
you could describe
that work.
So when you say that you were
keeping peace on the streets,
what exactly did that work
entail?
And how did you know
that those people were gay?
The way they acted?
Did you kill gay men
and gay women as well?
How many gay people do you
think that you've killed?
Did you not at all feel
like killing gay people
was interfering
with what your job was,
what you were being paid to do,
to protect people?
But -- I'm...
I want to say
that I'm gay.
Do you think
that's safe?
Maybe later.
[ Indistinct conversation ]
Do you want me
to say you, too, or no?
-Yeah.
-Okay.
We're gay,
and I'm wondering
if you think it's better
for the world for us to be dead.
PAGE: I'm standing in front of
a serial killer of gay people,
and I've just revealed
that Ian and I are gay.
What is it exactly about it
that troubles you
to such a degree that
you want to kill people?
How old was he when he --
when he told you he was gay,
and did he just come right out
and tell you about it,
or you found out
another way?
So did he just disappear?
Is he -- did he run away?
Where did he go?
Are there a lot of other men
out there like you?
That are killing
gay people?
This is probably one
of the longest conversations
you've had with two gay people,
or one gay person.
How are you feeling,
talking to us right now?
Well, this is obviously
really hard for us to listen to.
Um...
Yeah, it's -- it's something
that we will never forget.
It does leave you speechless,
honestly.
It's hard, because he looks
like such a fragile, old man
that has some sort of heart
in there that...
You know,
that's what it's like.
Can you get in there a little
bit and crack
a little ounce of love
out of you...
I mean, I don't think so.
...for people that
are different than you?
And it didn't seem
like that was possible.
And on some level,
you feel hopeless,
because it doesn't seem like
there's a way to stop it.
There's no justice
for these people.
It seems like
nothing's even talked about.
No one even knows
who these people are.
You know, because it's like,
"How do you stop that?"
PAGE: I've never stood in front
of someone in my life
who would think it's better
for the world to have me dead.
And there's lots
of those people,
but I've never stood
in front of one of them,
and who's killed many people
of the minority
that you're a part of.
It's a crazy-ass experience.
This trip to Brazil
has been intense.
On the one hand, I experienced
a vibrant, fun,
and proud queer community.
And on the other, a deep-rooted
hatred towards LGBTQ people.
Like so many aspects
of Brazilian life,
the contrasts here are extreme.
But it's impossible
not to be inspired by people
that live so freely,
and in such joyous celebration
of who they are,
especially in the face
of violence and intimidation.
I hope that the spirit
of Carnival,
the spirit of love
and acceptance and joy,
is what wins out in the end.